Inter-Cell communication of the Jailhouse Hypervisor
====================================================

The hypervisor isolates cells but sometimes there is a need to exchange data
between cells. For that purpose Jailhouse provides shared memory and signaling
between cells via virtual ivshmem PCI devices. This device type is specified
in [1].


Adding Inter-cell communication
-------------------------------

In order to set up a communication channel between two or more cells you first
have to add memory regions to both cells. Each cell needs the follow regions:

 - read-only region to hold state table, generally one page large
 - one region that is read/writable for all peers
 - one output region per peer that is only read-writeable for one of them

With 2 peers connected, this means a consecutive series of 4 regions needs to
be created. When connecting 3 peers, 5 regions are needed, and so on. All
regions must also be consecutive in guest-physical memory because only the
address for the first region is communicated to the guest.

The second, common read-write region is optional and can be zero-sized. Also
the output regions are optional. All output regions must have the same size.
Write permission to the first output region must only be granted to the cell
that has the ivshmem device ID 0, write permission to the second region must be
granted to ID 1, and so forth.

Non-root cells sharing memory with the root cell need the memory flag
`JAILHOUSE_MEM_ROOTSHARED` on the region.

To define the memory regions of an ivshmem-net device, the macro
`JAILHOUSE_SHMEM_NET_REGIONS(base_address, id)` is provided. It uses 1 MB of
memory at the specified base address and assigns access according to the
specified ID. Shared memory based network devices only connect 2 peers, thus
4 memory regions will be added.

After creating the memory regions, also a PCI device needs to be added to each
connected cell. Set the device type to `JAILHOUSE_PCI_TYPE_IVSHMEM`. The `bdf`
field must specify an unused bus-device-function slot on a physical or virtual
PCI controller. All connected peers must use the same `bdf` value in order to
establish the link. They may use different `domain` values, though.

Set the bar_mask to either `JAILHOUSE_IVSHMEM_BAR_MASK_MSIX` or
`JAILHOUSE_IVSHMEM_BAR_MASK_INTX`, depending on whether MSI-X is available or
not. When MSI-X is used, num_msix_vectors must be set according to the needs of
the shared memory protocol used on the link. For ivshmem networking, grant 2
vectors.

Further fields needed:
 - `shmem_regions_start` - index of first shared memory region used by device
 - `shmem_dev_id` - ID of the peer (0..`shmem_peers`-1)
 - `shmem_peers` - maximum number of connected peers
 - `shmem_protocol` - shared memory protocol used over the link

Set `shmem_protocol` to JAILHOUSE_SHMEM_PROTO_VETH for ivshmem networking, use
`JAILHOUSE_SHMEM_PROTO_UNDEFINED` for custom protocols, or pick an ID from the
custom range defined in [1].

You may also need to set the `iommu` field to match the IOMMU unit that the
guest expects based on the `bdf` value. Try 1 if MSI-X interrupts do not make
it when using 0.

For an example have a look at the cell configuration files `qemu-x86.c`,
`ivshmem-demo.c`, and `linux-x86-demo.c` in `configs/x86`.


Demo code
---------

The first demo case is the peer-to-peer networking device ivshmem-net. Virtual
networking is pre-configured in most ARM and ARM64 targets as well as in the
qemu-x86 virtual one. Also all targets supported by the demo image generator
[3] have this feature enabled. It depends on the ivshmem-net driver that is
available through the Linux kernel for Jailhouse, see [3] and jailhouse-enabling
branches in [4].

Some targets, e.g. qemu-x86, qemu-arm64 and orangepi0, have a raw ivshmem
multi-peer demo preconfigured. It can be used by running the ivshmem-demo
application under Linux and loading ivshmem-demo.bin into bare-metal cell. The
Linux application is also a demonstrator for the uio_ivshmem driver, providing
unprivileged access to a ivshmem device it regular processes. See the code in
`tools/ivshmem-demo.c` for details on the usage. The bare-metal ivshmem-demo is
loaded under x86 into the ivshmem-demo.cell while ARM and ARM64 use a
*-inmate.demo.cell corresponding to the target.

There is also work-in-progress support for transporting virtio over ivshmem.
Note that this is still experimental and can change until it may become part of
the official virtio specification.

Two virtio-ivshmem demo cases are prepared so far for qemu-x86, one providing a
virtio console from the root cell to the Linux non-root cell, the other a
virtio block device. Starting the demo requires a number of manual steps at
this point. Under the root cell, execute

    echo "110a 4106 110a 4106 ffc003 ffffff" > \
        /sys/bus/pci/drivers/uio_ivshmem/new_id

to bind the UIO driver to the ivshmem device acting as virtio console backend.
Then run

    virtio-ivshmem-console /dev/uio1

This tool can be built in the `tools/virtio` directory of [3]. Now you can
start a non-root Linux cell with `console=hvc0`, interacting with it in the
shell that runs the backend application. Make sure that the non-root Linux
kernel has the driver `virtio_ivshmem` (`CONFIG_VIRTIO_IVSHMEM`) from [3]
enabled.

Analogously, you can create a virtio block backend by running

    echo "110a 4106 110a 4106 ffc002 ffffff" > \
        /sys/bus/pci/drivers/uio_ivshmem/new_id

in the root cell. Then start the backend service like this:

    virtio-ivshmem-console /dev/uio2 /path/to/disk.image

The disk will show up as /dev/vda in the non-root Linux and can be accessed
normally.


References
----------

[1] Documentation/ivshmem-v2-specification.md
[2] https://github.com/siemens/jailhouse-images
[3] http://git.kiszka.org/?p=linux.git;a=shortlog;h=refs/heads/queues/jailhouse
[4] https://github.com/siemens/linux
